Many of us have lived with people we’d never
choose as house mates
— people we’ve found persistently disruptive,
argumentative, fussy, tactless.
We’ve endured everything from encroachment
on personal space
to noise pollution
to unsolicited life coaching.
Aggravating as this behaviour might be
there’s not necessarily
any malice behind it.
Maybe a degree of self-absorption,
poor personal boundaries.
Things tip over into abuse when the behaviour
becomes pervasively controlling and coercive.
Control might mean tracking people’s movements
forcing their attendance at events
monitoring their phone calls, texts, emails
governing their financial transactions
dictating their physical appearance
including clothes, hairstyles, body shape
deciding who they can and can’t see
including forcing unwanted relationships on them
and sabotaging their independence.
Coercive behaviour can involve threats
— real or implied
shaming and humiliation
raging
physical violence
and the destruction of property.
Because of the corrosive impact of this behaviour
targets are frequently advised to minimise
or terminate contact
with controlling coercive individuals.
It’s a simple equation.
Fewer encounters means fewer opportunities
for abuse.
But going low or no contact doesn’t always
feel possible.
Many targets find themselves isolated
in situations where they can’t see an exit.
Whether or not there actually are viable exits
becomes a moot point
if an individual isn’t able to see them.
To be achieved they have to be perceived.
Even when an exit emerges
targets sometimes find it suddenly blocked
by factors beyond their control.
I’ve received messages from individuals
locked in with abusive fundamentalist families,
living in fear
or concerned about other relatives
in that situation.
Others are being subjected to raging aggression
from disordered parents and partners.
I want to look at the experience of living
with abusers
and offer some thoughts
on dealing with the poison.
In particular I’ll be looking at some key
maladaptive habits to break
and some positive habits to cultivate.
It’s important to make a realistic assessment
of abusers.
What abusive behaviours have you witnessed
from them
—not just to you but to others?
Are there any you would class as dangerous?
How’s their impulse control?
Do they demonstrate the capacity to calm themselves?
Or do they ride their rage
for all it’s worth?
Where there’s a plausible physical threat
targets need to think seriously about taking
decisive action.
Targets who don’t feel ready to call directly
on law enforcement
can access support and practical guidance
from other confidential services.
Each country will have its own.
In the UK, organisations include
Refuge, Women’s Aid, Victim Support,
ManKind Initiative and Men’s Advice Line.
Sometimes targets shy away from action
fearing retribution.
But action and inaction both have significant risks.
And in many cases, over time the risks of
doing nothing
substantially outweigh the risks of doing
something
as the abuser becomes more chaotic and lethal
with age.
When children are involved, the risks are
further heightened.
The threat of physical violence
isn’t always present.
Sometimes the assault is psychological.
Whatever form the abuse takes, it’s important
to break the silence.
For targets who’ve been trained to hide
their abuse from the outside world
silence becomes a conditioned reflex;
a maladaptive habit.
Aside from preventing targets reaching out
for support
silence has a more insidious psychological
effect.
When something’s rendered unspeakable
it can become implicitly loaded with shame.
It’s one of the perversities of abusive
situations
that targets take on the burden of shame
that rightfully belongs to their abusers.
The act of speaking the unspeakable
works to counteract that shame.
For that reason, any external acknowledgement
of the abuse
however small, can have value —
even the act of writing it in a private journal.
Some targets have people in their personal
lives they feel they can talk to.
For others who aren’t sure who they can trust
anonymous helplines offer the chance to be
heard in confidence.
Anonymous online forums
can work in a similar way.
It’s worth noting that abusers are sometimes
drawn to those forums.
But it’s also worth noting that various
recent studies
support what many have long suspected —
that individuals who perpetrate cyberbullying
tend to show markedly low self-esteem.
Contact with external support can carry risks.
An anonymous correspondent who told me
he’d been confiding about his abuse with
a sympathetic friend
said he’d recently discovered his abuser
listening in on one of their phone calls.
Some abusers go as far as using spyware.
Maintaining your privacy around people who
routinely violate it
takes some careful and creative planning.
Abusers often provoke strong emotional responses
in targets
—guilt, anger, fear, shame, contempt;
confusing combinations of the above.
This works to the abuser’s advantage in
three ways.
First, targets’ emotional responses act
as a constant demonstration
that their abuser has the power to affect them
to jerk them around, to keep them preoccupied
with the abuser.
Second, arousing strong emotions keeps targets
off-balance
making it hard for them to think clearly and
respond rationally.
Many abusers keep targets on an emotional
merry-go-round
alternating vicious attacks with overblown
displays of love.
Third, by responding emotionally
targets stay tangled up in the conflict
and can end up giving abusers more material
to use against them.
Abusers can appear much larger
when viewed through an emotional lens.
They seem to cast a long shadow
and seep into all areas of the target’s life.
For these reasons, clinical detachment
is an important habit to cultivate —
the ability to stand back and view a situation
with a cold rational eye.
Analysing abusers with clinical detachment
helps to cut them down to size
as targets begin to see them
as humans with specific identifiable inadequacies.
It also helps to highlight the fact
that abusers fall
into a range of very different categories
with their own distinct driving motivations.
Some instigate the abuse all by themselves.
Some instigate it on the direction of others —
malignant cultural, political
and religious figures,
malignant scripture, malignant relatives.
Abusers also lie on a spectrum from order
to chaos.
While abusers at the ordered end might exhibit
various traits
associated with personality disorders
— like entitlement and
black-and-white thinking —
their abuse is often driven by dogmatic fixed ideas
rather than psychological disturbance.
Authoritarian abusers demand strict compliance
to rules
at the expense of personal freedoms.
If the rules are demeaning, tough.
It’s all framework, no feeling.
Attempts to challenge their rules are met
with tighter control.
Some of them misguidedly believe their abuse
performs some virtuous social function;
that it instils moral discipline in their
targets
eradicating undesirable attributes
and, ultimately, building a better society.
They treat their own pet theories
and personal preference as objective principles.
If they suspect some activity
— like a creative or intellectual pursuit —
leads to what they view as moral degeneracy
the activity is forbidden and punished.
Unsubstantiated hunch becomes law.
Because of this, they impose all kinds of
nonsensical rules
with no justification or explanation.
As arbitrary as their ideas might be
they don’t bring the kind of chaos you find
with some malignant personality disorders.
Many disordered abusers live in a land of
internal conflict and paradox.
They despise targets, but need their affirmation.
They crave praise, but question its sincerity
when they receive it.
They can’t stand solitude, but can’t bear
the company of authentic people.
In short, they want to be surrounded by individuals
who are devoid of personal needs.
When it comes to categorising abusers
things aren’t always what they seem.
An abuser might appear to be submitting to
the directions of another agent
— for example following the dictates of
some tyrannical scriptural god —
when in fact they’re just using
that other agent
as a front for their own cruelty.
Targets might want to believe everything would
be okey
if they could just get the abuser away from
the malignant influence.
But the abuser is the malignant influence.
For targets who suspect their abuser has a
personality disorder
learning about signs and symptoms
of antisocial, histrionic, borderline and
narcissistic disorders
can offer some insight into their experiences.
But there are pitfalls to keep in mind.
Distinguishing between disorders isn’t always
straightforward
and it’s easy to become invested
in a flawed diagnosis.
If that happens, targets can start projecting
qualities
onto their abuser that don’t exist.
And missing ones that do.
Abusers can also exhibit comorbidity
meaning they possess a combination of pathologies.
For these kinds of reasons, it’s wise not
to get overly concerned
with diagnostic terms
but to keep a rigorous focus
on the abuser’s actual behaviour.
And ‘behaviour’ is the operative term.
With abusers, words and actions often conflict.
The actions reveal the person.
Cultivating clinical detachment
not only helps to determine
the abuser’s nature
it also helps targets clarify their own thinking.
Many targets are susceptible to all kinds
of wishful thinking and confirmation bias.
It’s understandable —especially when
their abusers
are people they’ve loved and hoped to be
loved by.
There can be a huge temptation to deny or
minimise the problem
or fantasise that their abusers will see the
error of their ways
and transform into a decent human being.
These fantasies, hopes and denials all work
to keep targets stuck in the abuse.
Only when we’re working with good information
can we expect to respond effectively to a
situation.
Erasing illusions helps to establish psychological
separation.
Targets who previously saw themselves
as trapped inside their abuser’s dysfunctional world
begin to realise they’re
living next to someone
who’s trapped inside
their own dysfunctional world.
Even when targets start seeing their abusers
for who they really are
it can take a while for some of their own
counterproductive habits to die off.
But over time the absurdity of those habits
become increasingly clear.
If targets could see how their words were
fragmented
into total garbage by their abuser’s selective
hearing
made to fit whatever fantasy happened to be
flying
through the abuser’s head at that moment
they’d soon stop making any effort.
They’d stop trying to reason with unreasoning
individuals;
appealing for fairness from people
who equate fairness with personal disadvantage;
wanting to be understood by individuals
who exercise control by misunderstanding;
being open and earnest with Machiavellian
manipulators
who have one use for personal information:
ammunition.
These habits come under the heading:
‘speaking a dead language’.
For abusers all these languages
— reason, fairness,
understanding and honesty —
undermine their power position
by providing a path
to truth and accountability.
They take refuge in other languages
— non sequiturs, double talk, word salad
and bare-faced lies —
to maintain their corrupted sense of power.
An anonymous correspondent
told me how her abuser
would repeatedly make not-so-subtle innuendos
and insinuations.
When directly confronted, the abuser would
play innocent
and protest she was misunderstood.
These exchanges were described as unnerving
and exhausting.
Many targets will instantly recognise this tactic
which is a particular favourite among more
fragile abusers
who prefer covert indirect forms of attack.
It’s so common, it even has a name: DARVO.
This acronym lays out the sequence of events
that happens when abusers instigate an offence
and get confronted by their target.
First, they deny the offence
sometimes concocting
groan-worthy cover-up stories.
Then they go on the attack by playing the
wounded party themselves
reversing the roles of victim and offender.
This role-switching element — sometimes
called the ‘cross up’ —
is a signature component
of psychological games
leaving the target in a spin.
Role-switching games come in many forms.
Some games start with abusers trying to put
the target in the role of ‘rescuer’.
They might put themselves down
or complain about other people attacking them.
The target is then expected
to leap to the rescue.
But any attempts to support the abuser are
never quite good enough.
Eventually the abuser switches from victim
to persecutor
turning on the target — who gets flipped
from rescuer to victim.
Abusers are like porcupines, loaded with hooks.
And targets repeatedly turn up
wearing chain mail —
suits of chunky metal rings
waiting to be hooked.
This image reflects how targets often invest
in maladaptive strategies around abusers
which just get them more entangled.
Each of the rings in the chain mail
could be thought of as a reflex response
that can be exploited by the abuser.
Examples might include
the instinct to fend off insults;
to protest against false allegations;
to insist on due credit when it’s denied.
The problem with reflex responses is that
they’re fixed and unthinking.
They don’t adapt to different conditions.
In fair-minded rational company
these reflex responses might work very effectively
as social nudges that prevent conflict escalation.
In the Bizarro world of abusers
these reflexes have the opposite effect
drawing targets into conflict escalation.
Unhooking ourselves from these conflicts
involves stepping back
and examining our own responses.
When we become aware
of our fixed mindless reflexes
we can start to replace them with flexible
mindful reflection.
We can control our responses instead of being
controlled by them.
Instead of mindlessly reacting to abusers’
insults
we can mindfully recognise they just want
to feed off our reaction
and we can choose to disengage.
If abusers attempt to draw us into false competition
negatively comparing our attributes and achievements
to those of their own or other people
we can choose to detach from those comparisons.
If abusers attempt to smear us to reasonable
fair-minded people
we can choose to assert our innocence to those
reasonable people
and mindfully choose not to confront the abuser.
As we start recognising the abuser’s hooks
we can even put names to them.
Inwardly, we register to ourselves:
Ah, that’s the competition hook!
Ah, that’s the false accusation hook!
Piece by piece, the chain mail
of automatic reflexes
that previously weighed us down fades away
allowing the freedom
to step away from the games.
In avoiding one hook, it’s easy to walk
straight into another.
Stepping away from the games means
not fighting to get the upper hand.
But it also means not making a big display
of showing the abuser you’re not fighting
to get the upper hand —
which, let’s be honest,
is just another way
of fighting to get the upper hand.
The aim is to offer as little as possible;
to display no emotion; volunteer no opinion.
Just give bland vague responses.
This method of handling hooks
is called ‘grey rock’
because it’s about making yourself as uninteresting
and unengaging as a grey rock.
But there are some points to bear in mind
when using it.
There might be a temptation
to let abusers know
you’re deliberately grey-rocking them;
to rub it in their faces.
Besides instantly nullifying the method
this can inspire more focussed abuse.
High levels of exposure to abusers can mean
lots of grey rock interactions.
As a result, some targets might occasionally feel
a little emotionally disconnected.
To reconnect, it’s helpful for targets
to identify the things that recharge them.
It could be music, nature,
physical activity —
whatever brings them vividly to life.
Grey rock might sometimes involve pragmatic
gestures of concession.
For example, if an abuser compares you unfavourably
with other people
there might be times when, instead of responding
in a neutral way
you might choose to agree.
This agreement isn’t about
pleasing the abuser
or putting yourself down.
It’s about freeing yourself.
Allowing yourself to express genuine agreement
can be a great help in ridding yourself of
reflex defensiveness.
If the grey rock responses are too abrupt
it can attract attention
instead of reducing it.
Sometimes it’s useful to use a variation
I call beige rock.
Here the target’s responses have a little
more colour
to make them less severe.
It might mean using fuller sentences
instead of monosyllabic shrugs
and allowing slightly longer interactions
instead of making swift exits.
When we begin to navigate living with abusers
more effectively
we might feel a swell of compassion for them.
As their hold on us wanes we become charitable,
magnanimous
especially if we discover our abusers
were themselves abused in the past
or if they seem to show a degree
of self-awareness and remorse.
A word of caution.
We are not our abusers’ therapists.
Attempting to take on any responsibility for
their rehabilitation
can be the prelude to more abusive games.
Some abusers ask their target to tell them
when they’re behaving unreasonably.
This might seem like a positive request.
But when the target later points out some
unreasonable behaviour
the game is revealed —
the abuser uses the criticism to start a fight.
When abusers claim to see
the error of their ways
and express a desire to change
for many targets, it’s exactly what they
want to hear
and there’s a big temptation to let their
guard down
gush openly about their feelings
and talk about a new start together.
Unfortunately many targets discover too late
that it was all a ploy for the abuser
to find out what they were really thinking.
When abusers claim to have some personal epiphany
targets are wise to maintain their guard,
if not raise it.
It’s not cruel or mean to distrust people
who’ve repeatedly destroyed your trust.
It’s rational and healthy.
Abusers who profess a desire to change
can demonstrate their sincerity
by taking full responsibility for that change.
Targets are well advised to stand back
and stay focussed on their own development.
Even in cases of genuine change
the ground might just be too scorched for
trust to ever grow.
In those cases, it’s up to abusers to live
with the distrust they’ve created.
‘What hurt the most
wasn’t the actual abuse.’
‘It was the fact that when I finally started
talking about it ….’
’….no one wanted to listen.’
During my therapeutic work and conversations
with targets of abuse
that sentiment’s been repeatedly voiced.
Some individuals go through life believing
that if they ever reported being abused
their loved ones — friends, relatives or
partners —
wouldn’t hesitate to support them.
Thankfully, many individuals will never have
to put that belief to the test.
Sadly, many others will discover the human
safety net
they believed would catch them doesn’t exist.
When they finally share their story
their loved ones’ response is to back away.
While it might start to feel like a deliberate
conspiracy
it generally comes down to a jumble of common
human shortcomings.
Apathy — some people just want a quiet life
with no complications.
Pride —some have been long-term supporters
of the abuser
and refuse to believe they’ve been fooled.
Fear — some have a sense
of the abuser’s  nature
and don’t want to become a target themselves.
Ignorance —some lack the experience or
imagination
to absorb what they’re being told.
The net result is that targets are left in
no doubt:
they’re on their own.
Going it alone places an uncommon burden on
targets.
As a social species, we’re geared to interact
productively with others.
Through the responses we receive from others
we get constant feedback about how we’re
being perceived
which in turn shapes our self-perception.
We act as ‘reality reflectors’
to each other.
In healthy situations where we experience
decent volumes of good-quality rounded feedback
we gain and maintain a strong sense of ourselves.
In abusive situations, where the feedback
is grossly distorted or negating
targets can develop a grossly distorted or
empty sense of self.
To achieve anything approaching a healthy
sense of self
targets of abuse have to take extra measures
to correct the constant bogus feedback they receive.
The analogy I often return to
is that targets are continually being drip-fed
from the abuser’s poison well.
To dilute the poison, targets have to cultivate
their own clear healthy wells.
And the more wells the better.
Each well represents a source
of healthy reality reflection
through which targets can gain a clearer stronger
sense of self.
Some of the best sources of healthy reflection
can be other people.
Having just one individual in your personal life
who sees things clearly can make all the difference
in combating the poison.
Another kind of human well might be an online
community
who shares similar experiences.
For many targets, listening to other people’s stories
can be a powerful detox.
And it’s not uncommon for targets to go
through
periods of binge-watching abuse-related videos.
It’s not about wallowing in misery.
It’s about bathing in the acknowledgement
of reality.
Finally, they’re hearing their own previously
denied experiences reflected back.
They’re not going mad. They’re not invisible.
There are people out there
who know what goes on
behind closed doors and don’t want
to twist it or silence it.
Recording our lives in a journal or video diary
creates another kind of well
reminding us that the past really happened.
Personal interestsmake great wells.
Physical activities, fields of study,
creative pursuits.
These things contribute to our sense
of being a distinct person with our own tastes.
Of course individuality isn’t something
abusers are keen to encourage
and it’s wise to anticipate some sabotage.
As a child I got into drawing superhero comics.
When I was around seven I decided to write
a complete comic.
For weeks I stuck to my goal of drawing a
page every night
until one night it was done.
When I proudly took it down to show my parents
my narcissist mother flicked through it briefly
then ripped it up.
It didn’t meet with her personal vision.
Abusers often work to inhibit, disrupt or
destroy
whatever the target shows interest in.
Some targetslearn —like I did — to
pursue their interests in private.
Those who do persist and develop some skills
will sometimes experience
another twist in later life
when their abuser attempts to rewrite history
and take credit for encouraging and nurturing
those skills.
Sadly in the face of aggressive opposition
many targets just give up on their interests
completely
helping to starve them of their individuality.
Digging for metaphorical water
can take hard work
just like digging for real water.
Finding and maintaining good reliable sources
can feel like a struggle at first
but gets easier with time and practice.
The more interests we develop
the more facets of ourselves we recover
and discover.
For my brother and I
the poison well we grew up next to was deep
and wide.
Endless psychological traps, outlandish accusations,
constant violent rages.
We can look back and remember
it all very clearly.
But it didn’t define our childhoods.
What defined our childhoods
—and what we endlessly recall together
with laughter and affection —
were the multiple healthy wells we cultivated
for ourselves
that pushed the poison to the sidelines.
When we’re replacing old habits
with new ones
we sometimes feel conflicted
even if we’re trying to improve our situation.
Any change —positive or negative —
can arouse mixed feelings
or unexpected resistance within us.
Portia Nelson’s poem ‘Autobiography in
five short chapters’
perfectly captures the confusion of the process.
In chapter one, you’re walking down a street
when you fall down a hole in the sidewalk.
It takes ages to make your way out.
In chapter two you walk down the same street.
You pretend to yourself
that you can’t see the hole
—and you fall down it again.
You don’t know why.
Again, it takes you a long time to climb out.
In chapter three you walk down the same street.
There’s no pretending now. You see the hole.
And you still fall into it.
But you can see it’s your own fault now —
something you’re doing to yourself
out of habit.
You climb out fast.
In chapter four you walk down the same street.
Finally you walk around the hole.
At last, you’ve absorbed the lesson.
In chapter five
you walk down a different street.
Some of us will eventually exit the abusive
environment.
We’ll start new lives
with a strict door policy.
But whether we do or not
there’s no need to put our lives on hold
while we happen to be living with abusers.